Article I

The name of the organization shall be The Imaginary Historians’ Society.

Article II

The Purpose of The Imaginary Historians’ Society is to preserve from annihilation the documents,
papers, letters, artifacts, relics, and records of the imaginary history.

Article III

The Imaginary Historians’ Society is overseen by a self-perpetuating council of three. The council
is to meet semiannually. The council’s responsibilities cover all aspects of the Society, including
appointing a Director, determining qualifications for membership, collection policies, publications, and
financial matters. The Council shall publish irregularly an unabridged report of the Society and its
operations.
Article IV
Membership to The Imaginary Historians’ Society is granted at the Council’s discretion to
imaginary persons who apply.
Article V
The Director is an office appointed by the council whenever a vacancy occurs, by resignation,
death, or removal from office. A unanimous vote among all three Councilmembers is needed to appoint or
remove a Director.
The Director oversees the day-to-day operations of the Society.
Article VI
The Charter of The Imaginary Historians’ Society can be amended by either two votes from the
Council and the approval of the Director or three votes from the Council.
Article VII
The Imaginary Historians’ Society shall maintain and operate an Archive of Important Evidences,
which is to preserve papers, objects, and all material which is deemed permanently valuable as an aid to
understanding the imaginary history, or is of interest to the Society.
Article VIII
The Imaginary Historians’ Society shall operate an Imaginary Historians’ Society Press, which is
to publish articles, reprint primary sources, and in general support the imaginary history.
Article IX
The Imaginary Historians’ Society shall operate a library, which is to collect books having to do
with the imaginary history, or which are of interest to the Society.

* Bylaws

The text of these bylaws can be amended with majority consent among characters  who have participated in the Imaginary Historians Society within the past month.

* Membership

To become a member of The Imaginary Historians Society a character must
submit a CV and a masters thesis which meets the following criteria:

- At least 1000 words
- Scholarly in tone and affect
- Well researched
- Contributing new knowledge to the field of history
- Not plagiarized or copied from any source
- Not written with the aid of generative artificial intelligence
- Not previously submitted to The Imaginary Historians Society

Submitted theses will be reviewed by an admissions committee of three.
Each committee member shall make an evaluation
which will be one of three possibilities:

- ACCEPT
- REJECT
- REQUEST REVISION

If all three members of the committee ACCEPT the thesis, the character
is a member of the Imaginary Historians Society as a PhD Student, and
granted all the rights and privileges thereof.

If any one of the committee members REJECT a thesis, the thesis is not
accepted and the character must submit another one.

If one or more committee members REQUEST REVISION of a thesis, supplying
suggestions and notes, the character may revise and resubmit. The revised
thesis will then be evaluated by each committee member with either
ACCEPT AFTER REVISION or REJECT.

* Style 


