Project Description of The Imaginary Historians Society

by Wesley Sonheim

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Despite the temptation to run an entire website in character, I think it might be a good idea to have at least one coherent description of what this project is, what its aims and principles are, and how to engage with it. Currently the project is prospective--it's only me, Wesley, working on it. I am imagining what might develop once more people come into it. It is likely that the project will grow up to be very different from this description, in which case we will have to write another one. But here is what I am thinking of the project at the outset.

The Imaginary Historians Society could be described as a creative writing roleplaying project. Each participant (I hesitate to use the term "player") assumes the role of one or more imaginary scholars. The main activity of scholars (and, therefore, the participants) is writing papers about history. The characters write the papers, do research, publish, cite and are cited by others. The life of a character-historian is known through their work, and also through little bits and pieces; semester class lists, departmental emails, etc.

To participate, a person needs to submit a "Masters Thesis" written by a character-historian to the society. Since most of the work of the project is writing, this high barrier of entry acclimates participants to the work at hand. The thesis must be reviewed and approved by a committee of character-historians who are already members of the society; this allows participants to give some feedback on stylistic and content norms.

Once a thesis has been accepted by the committee, the character-historian is a member of the society. They may publish articles in the journal, and begin teaching seminars in the course list. There will be a departmental hierarchy; tenured professors, graduate students, a departmental chair. There may be some office politic roleplay. A library should be maintained with new books constanstly being added. An archive might begin to process accessions, producing finding aids. The main work, though, ought to be the composition of scholarly historical articles.

Character-historians will cite each other, of course, and argue. There will be schools of though. There will be fields and subfields. There will be pet subjects and fashionable topics and favorite areas. All of the interaction between character-historians will be writing, and most of this writing will take the form of published articles.

The history is imagined--it's a science fiction history, contributed to by character-historians. I hesitate to consider this a /worldbuilding/ project. To me, worldbuilding implies work towards some objective whole, some finished product of canon. Worldbuilding is the development of content, content in which interesting stories can be told. After worldbuilding, you might want to start a roleplaying game campaign in the world, or write some fiction set within the world. I'm not very interested in this as the goal of this project. I don't want the imaginary history to be a publishable game setting. I'm adamant that the main genre of writing produced by this project should not be narrative fiction. It should be imaginary history.

What interests me in this project is not so much the content of history, but the form. The form of historical writing and scholarship; the motions that scholars do. In The Imaginary Historians Society there is no canon. There is no objectively understood event that we, as participants, /know/ happened. What we have instead are only essays; opinions written by character-historians, which might be contradicted. We hope that our character-historians write the best history with the evidence and methods they have, but we have no assurance of this. The Imaginary Historians Society is all secondary sources.

I don't expect there to be a large amount of canonical shift throughout The Imaginary Historians Society--after all, we can expect scholars to be more or less diligent and fairly conservative--but I do think it's important that there be some degree of forgetfulness. The canon of the imaginary history is only held together through the strength of contemporary analysis and synthesis.

I don't plan on implementing any kind of enforced loss on the essays and articles here, but I do hope that we will be able to engage with the growing corpus with the skeptical minds of character-historians attempting to make a name for themselves. It will be okay to write and rewrite revisionist histories.

What's important about history--real history--is what's being written in the now. History is looking backwards into the disappearing /before now/ and holding onto it as if it informs the now. We make narratives and formulate facts, and construct timelines, and we do this because it is important for our existence now to hold them. We combine the /we are/ and the /we were/, and this work is what makes us human.

But the activity of writing history produces documents, and these are read for a time and then forgotten. Historical work then itself passes into history, and in order to continue to hold on to the past we must write new histories. For The Imaginary Historians Society objective reality is determined by the  work of character-historians in the now. It must be an active churn, or else the imaginary history ossifies, becoming nothing more than a collection of made-up facts posted on a website somewhere.

For The Imaginary Historians Society, then, I am attempting to create a living and dynamic thing. We know the world is living because the character-historians are living in it, and we know them through their work.

The setting or genre of The Imaginary Historians Society is some kind of interplanetary society, with lots of room for different histories. I am partial to a certain kind of brutalist-esque 1970s academic realism. I'm not particularly interested in a menagerie of goofy aliens or absurd hilarity. (Not that there's anything wrong with either of these things, of course, it's just not what I have in mind for this project.)

I think it will take some time to find a balance between too much and too little writing for participation. I expect that this project will be a slow-moving one, and perhaps a little lonely. Participants will spend most of their time citing sources that don't exist all on their own. Hopefully we'll be able to find a fulfilling rhythm.
