#+TITLE: Computation Mainframes in Early Deep Space Explorations

by Raisha Xarex

-------------------------------------------------------

* Abstract

At the  outset of  the Second Exploration,  there were  four mainframe
computer  assemblies capable  of processing  Starship Navigation  Data
Packets (SNDaPs) at the scale  required for effective Dynamic Variable
Hyperspace  calculations. These  were:  INIC,  designed by  Industrial
Designs,  Inc., Orion  II,  from  Intex, and  the  AL-2900 and  RL-320
Systems, from Trepidatious Enterprises.

Second   Exploration   program   directors   were   mandated   immense
responsibility  and had  to  make difficult  choices about  personnel,
resource managament,  and technological  progress.  This  essay argues
early  decisions  about  deep  space  computation  during  the  Second
Exploration, particularly  the dominance  of INIC  compatible systems,
had a tremendous  effect upon starship capabilities in  the middle and
late  phases  of the  period.  Ultimately,  these early  technological
choices--especially  the  focus  on  paper  storage  and  Lars-Krommon
logic--were contributing factors in the  decline and collapse of space
exploration during the era.

This paper describes the historical and technical contexts for 

* Introduction

...


By the middle  of the Second Exploration,  and thereafter, exploratory
programs  favored  paper  punch  card  memory  systems  over  magnetic
media. This method wasmore secure in the short term, as magnetic media
could  be  susceptible to  radiation  and  relativity effects  of  DVH
travel.  In  the  long  term, however,  the  memory  requirements  for
extended hyperspace travel corresponded to  an increase of vessel size
to accomodate  card storage  and processing facilities.  The increased
size  and personnel  requirements of  these vessels  greatly increased
cost, which resulted in fewer exploratory vessels in operation.

Exploratory   programs    favored   Lars-Krommen's    Complete   Logic
Architecture[fn:3]

* Historical Background

3204.3 is  generally considered  to be  the start  date of  the Second
Exploration. King  Ozz III of  Naru-B issued a  proclamation declaring
exploration  of outer  space to  be  "The highest  ideal of  planetary
patriotism.", and "The fulfillment of Orontic heritage."

Along  with   the  rhetorical   effects,  the   proclamation  directed
substantial planetary funds towards those explorations.

Following within 8 months of  this proclamation three expeditions were
mounted: the Righteous, with a crew of  86; the Oron II, with 109; and
the

* Technical Background

Until the discovery of abstractspace  by Ariel Moriarty in 5389[fn:1],
the only known  reliable method of faster than light  (FTL) travel was
to   briefly   pass   into   (or  "skim")   hyperspace   with   fusion
engines.  Vessels would  accelerate  to  near-light speeds  (generally
between 0.8c  and 0.85c) while  advancing parallel  to the plane  of a
hyperspace fold. This allowed the vessel to rapidly oscillate into and
out  of hyperspace.[fn:2]  Since hyperspace  is wrapped  around normal
space (more precisely:  since each point in  hyperspace corresponds to
at least two  in normal space), the effect of  this oscillation was to
carry the ship "along" the hyperspace fold.

This  method of  travel was  cumbersome and  costly. The  vessels were
large  to accomodate  the fusion  engines, and  were at  the mercy  of
hyperspace fold. The  nearest hyperspace fold to Naru-B,  home of Ozz,
is 3 light years away. During  the entirety of the Second Exploration,
and well  after, starships spent 4  years in deep space  at near-light
before skimming hyperspace and completing their voyage.

Early forms of hyperspace skimming chose a vector along the hyperspace
fold, and  rode it until  the oscillations wavered out  of proportion.
This  came to  be known  as Static  Variable Hyperspace  travel (SVH),
because  the  trajectory of  the  vessel  relative to  the  fold-plane
remained  locked to  the  plane itself.  These  calculations could  be
computed  by humans,  and were  suitable  for early  forays into  deep
space,  as  well  as  generation-ship  colonization  efforts.[fn:4]  A
drawback of  this kind of travel  was unpredictability--the hyperspace
fold often  spit vessels  back into  normal space  between 20  and 100
light   years   off   course.[fn:5]  While   hyperspace   folds   are,
definitionally, static phenomena, the skimming vector was often chosen
using guesswork.

Dynamic Variable Hyperspace travel, or  DVH, was invented in 297.04 by
Rushmon Alton, allowed the vessel to adjust its relative trajectory to
match the  obverse fold-plane, thereby  giving the navigator  far more
control over  how far the  fold would  take it.  The  calculations for
this kind of travel are orders  of magnitude more complex, and require
the  processing of  micro-second  snapshot of  stars. This  complexity
scaled with the mass of the vessel, since the vibrance of oscillations
were attached to each point of  the vessel along its cleavage with the
fold-plane.

Computer   mainframe  assemblies   were   developed   to  make   these
calculations.  An array  of  radiotelescopes produced  data about  the
relative location,  and speed  of the starship.  SNDaPs were  then fed
into  the mainframe  assembly  (electronically,  mechanically, or,  in
extreme circumstances /manually/), and the 

* Footnotes

[fn:5]  The /Osiris/, founding  ship of the  Rojek Colony,
which  became  New Loston,  was  notably  thrown  off course  in  this
way.  The indended  destination for  the /Osiris/  was the  planet now
known as  Yund II. Futher  reading on such  incidents can be  found in
Reich Morris' A Fearsome Dark.

[fn:4] Morris, Reich. _A Fearsome Dark: Deep Space Colonizaton Between
the First and Second Explorations_.  New Loston. Wid University Press,
883 YU.

[fn:3] Lars, Astrid  and Morell, Krommen. "A  Complete Logic
Architecture for  Generalizable Computation."  New Loston.  Morris and
Morris, 345 UJ.

[fn:2] 

[fn:1]Moriarty,  Ariel.   "n-manifold  Ryann   Transformations  Within
Parallel Frames"
